README.md, before:

# TextEvolve

![TextEvolve Overview](images/textevolve_diagram.png)

An advanced AI system that uses LLM-driven reasoning and memory to iteratively improve its approach to solving problems from datasets. The system is task-agnostic, meaning no prompting or instruction is needed for a new dataset - just provide "question" and "answer" fields. The system employs dynamic exploration/exploitation strategies and adapts its approach (creating new functions, writing code that generates and executes new code, writing prompts, etc.) based on performance feedback.

⚠️ EXPERIMENTAL ⚠️ The system also includes a meta-self-modifying loop (system_improver.py), using higher order instructions to edit the system (this respository).

## 📄 Paper & Demo

**📖 Read the Paper:** [TextEvolve: LLM-Driven Iterative Problem Solving](https://drive.google.com/file/d/11ZOOjVJeDfmoP1-sabi8lVWO9UEifZlP/view?usp=sharing)

**🎥 Watch the Demo:** [YouTube](https://youtu.be/QS-Mzb7P_9w)

**📁 Examples in Action:** 

[System-generated script for MATH dataset](examples/MATH_script.py)

[Memory / experiment log for HotpotQA](examples/HOTPOTQA_learnings.txt)


🚧 **Repository Status: Under Construction** 🚧

**Current State:**
- ✅ TextEvolve is stable and runs successfully
- 🔄 Codebase is actively being refactored and cleaned up
- 📝 Documentation and examples are being written
- 🏗️ Repository structure may change frequently

Please expect ongoing changes to code organization, APIs, and documentation as we work toward a more polished release.

---

 

## 🚀 Quick Start

⚠️ TextEvolve has the ability to write and execute code - please run the system in a safe or sandboxed environment ⚠️

1. **Set your Gemini API key:**
   ```bash
   export GEMINI_API_KEY=your_api_key_here
   ```

2. **Run the system:**
   ```bash
   # Basic usage with 5 iterations
   python run_script.py --dataset your_dataset.jsonl --loader jsonl --iterations 5

   # Example with MATH benchmark
   python run_script.py --dataset hendrycks_math/math_test.jsonl --loader math --iterations 5
   ```

You can run more iterations if you're unsatisfied with the result. This will pick up right where the system left off. After the system runs you'll see a final report:
![](images/system_output.png)

4. **Validate results:**
   ```bash
   # Test the best script on examples 100-199
   python validate_script.py --script scripts/script_iteration_4.py --dataset hendrycks_math/math_test.jsonl --loader math --start 100 --end 199
   ```

5. **Reset system:**
   ```bash
   # Wipe memory and start the system from scratch
   python reset_system.py
   ```

## 📊 Supported Dataset Formats

The system supports multiple dataset formats through modular loaders:

### Built-in Loaders

| Loader | Dataset Type | Example Usage |
|--------|--------------|---------------|
| `arc` | ARC (Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus) | `--loader arc` |
| `jsonl` | JSONL files (one JSON per line) | `--loader jsonl` |
| `json` | JSON files with configurable fields | `--loader json` |
| `simpleqa` | SimpleQA dataset | `--loader simpleqa` |
| `math` | MATH dataset | `--loader math` |
| `natural_plan` | Natural Plan dataset | `--loader natural_plan` |
| `gpqa` | GPQA dataset | `--gpqa` |
| `hotpotqa` | HotpotQA dataset | `--gpqa` |
| `custom` | Your own custom format | `--loader custom` |

### Usage Examples

```bash
# ARC dataset (directory of JSON files)
python run_script.py --dataset ARC_2024_Training/ --loader arc --iterations 10

# JSONL dataset (like MATH benchmark)
python run_script.py --dataset math_test.jsonl --loader math --iterations 5

# Custom JSON with specific fields
python run_script.py --dataset custom.json --loader json --input-field question --output-field answer --iterations 5

# JSONL with custom fields (like DROP dataset)
python run_script.py --dataset drop_dataset.jsonl --loader jsonl --input-field question --output-field answers_spans --iterations 5

# Disable shuffling for consistent ordering
python run_script.py --dataset dataset.jsonl --loader jsonl --no-shuffle --iterations 5
```

## 🔧 Command Line Options

### run_script.py

| Option | Description | Default |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `--iterations` | Number of iterations to run | 5 |
| `--dataset` | Path to dataset file/directory | required |
| `--loader` | Type of dataset loader | required |
| `--input-field` | Input field name (JSON/JSONL) | "input" |
| `--output-field` | Output field name (JSON/JSONL) | "output" |
| `--passage-field` | Passage field (JSONL) | "passage" |
| `--no-shuffle` | Disable dataset shuffling | False |
| `--seed` | Random seed | 42 |

### validate_script.py

| Option | Description | Default |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `--script` | Path to script to validate | required |
| `--dataset` | Path to dataset | required |
| `--loader` | Dataset loader type | required |
| `--start` | Start index for validation | 0 |
| `--end` | End index for validation | 99 |
| `--detailed` | Show detailed results | False |

## 🏗️ Creating Custom Dataset Loaders

### Method 1: Simple Custom Loader

For basic custom formats, extend the `DatasetLoader` class:

```python
from dataset_loader import DatasetLoader
import json

class MyDatasetLoader(DatasetLoader):
    def _load_examples(self):
        """Load examples from your custom format"""
        with open(self.dataset_path, 'r') as f:
            data = json.load(f)

        for key, example in data.items():
            # Convert to standard format
            self.examples.append({
                "id": key,
                "question": example["my_input_field"],  # Standard field: "question"
                "answer": example["my_output_field"],   # Standard field: "answer"
                "meta": {
                    "source": "my_dataset",
                    "original_data": example
                }
            })

        print(f"Loaded {len(self.examples)} examples from custom dataset")

# Register and use your loader
from dataset_loader import create_dataset_loader

def create_my_loader(**kwargs):
    return MyDatasetLoader(**kwargs)

# Add to the create_dataset_loader function or use directly
loader = MyDatasetLoader(dataset_path="my_data.json", shuffle=True)
```

### Method 2: Using the Custom Loader Framework

For more complex formats, use the built-in custom loader:

```python
from dataset_loader import create_dataset_loader

def load_my_examples(dataset_path):
    """Load examples from your dataset"""
    # Your custom loading logic
    with open(dataset_path, 'r') as f:
        raw_data = f.read()

    # Process and return list of examples
    examples = []
    # ... your processing logic ...
    return examples

def get_my_input(example):
    """Extract input from example"""
    return example["my_question_field"]

def get_my_output(example):
    """Extract output from example"""
    return example["my_answer_field"]

# Create the custom loader
loader = create_dataset_loader(
    "custom",
    dataset_path="my_dataset.xyz",
    load_examples_fn=load_my_examples,
    get_input_fn=get_my_input,
    get_output_fn=get_my_output,
    shuffle=True
)

# Use with agent system
from agent_system import AgentSystem
agent = AgentSystem(dataset_loader=loader)
```

## 📈 How It Works

### 1. Adaptive Strategy

The system uses three main strategies:
- **Explore** (60% initially): Try completely new approaches
- **Exploit** (20% initially): Combine successful techniques  
- **Refine** (20% initially): Make targeted improvements to the best script

The balance between these strategies adapts based on performance.

### 2. Progressive Testing

- Starts with small batches (3-5 examples)
- For promising scripts (>60% accuracy), runs progressive testing (backtesting) on a set of previously seen examples
- Adjusts batch size based on performance, balancing throughput with acquiring accurate measurement of itertation performance

### 3. LLM-Driven Improvements

- Uses LLM reasoning for strategy decisions, error analysis, and script generation
- Employs and creates novel advanced agentic patterns like ReAct, chain-of-thought, and verification loops
- Automatically repairs and debugs generated scripts

### 4. Example Workflow

```
Iteration 0: Baseline script (simple LLM call) → 45% accuracy
Iteration 1: Explore new approach → 62% accuracy → Progressive testing → 58% overall
Iteration 2: Exploit successful techniques → 71% accuracy → Progressive testing → 65% overall  
Iteration 3: Refine best approach → 73% accuracy → Progressive testing → 68% overall
...
```


## Quick Setup

### 1. Install uv (if not already installed)

**macOS/Linux:**
```bash
curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh
```

### 2. Clone and Setup Project

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone <www.github.com/nickcdryan/madas>

# Install dependencies (creates virtual environment automatically)
uv sync

# Set up your Gemini API key
export GEMINI_API_KEY=your_api_key_here
```

### 3. Verify Installation

```bash
# Run the verification script
uv run python verify_setup.py

# Quick test run (optional)
uv run python run_script.py --dataset hendrycks_math/math_test.jsonl --loader math --iterations 1
```

## 📁 Output Structure

The system creates several directories:

```
├── archive/                 # Iteration data and summaries
│   ├── iteration_0.json    # Detailed data for each iteration
│   ├── iteration_1.json
│   └── summaries.json      # Performance summaries
├── scripts/                # Generated scripts
│   ├── script_iteration_0.py
│   ├── script_iteration_1.py
│   └── ...
├── learnings.txt           # Accumulated insights and patterns
└── README.md
```

## 🎯 Performance Tracking

The system tracks multiple metrics:

- **Batch Accuracy**: Performance on current test batch
- **Progressive Accuracy**: Performance on small set of previously seen examples  
- **Combined Accuracy**: Weighted average across all tested examples
- **Capability Assessment**: Strengths, weaknesses, and improvement areas

Example output:
```
Iteration  Strategy     Batch Acc.   Prog. Acc.      Combined    Batch Size  Prog. Size
8          exploit      75.00%       68.33% (60)     69.23%      4           60
```

## EXPERIMENTAL: Meta Self-Improvement

system_improver.py has access to review and edit the core functionality of the repository. Specifically, system_improver.py 
1) reviews the program
2) reviews iteration history and performance
3) reviews past changes made by system_improver.py in /diffs
4) proposes and integrates changes to the system, e.g. adding utility function, rewriting meta-agent prompts, etc.
5) creates system backups in /backup (eventually auto-rollback will be integrated if the new changes are system-breaking)

This system does not reliably work yet, please stay tuned.


## 🛠️ Advanced Usage

### Programmatic Usage

```python
from dataset_loader import create_dataset_loader
from agent_system import AgentSystem

# Create dataset loader
loader = create_dataset_loader(
    "jsonl",
    dataset_path="your_dataset.jsonl",
    shuffle=True,
    random_seed=42
)

# Initialize agent system
agent = AgentSystem(dataset_loader=loader)

# Run iterations
for i in range(10):
    result = agent.run_iteration()
    print(f"Iteration {i}: {result.get('performance', {}).get('accuracy', 0):.2f} accuracy")

# Get best script info
best_script = agent.get_best_script_info()
print(f"Best script: {best_script.get('path')} with {best_script.get('combined_accuracy', 0):.2f} accuracy")
```

### Custom Field Mapping

For datasets with non-standard field names:

```bash
# JSON dataset with custom fields
python run_script.py --dataset custom.json --loader json --input-field "problem_statement" --output-field "solution"

# JSONL dataset with passage and question
python run_script.py --dataset reading_comprehension.jsonl --loader jsonl --input-field "question" --passage-field "context" --output-field "answer"
```

## 🤝 Contributing

To add support for a new dataset format:

1. Create a new loader class inheriting from `DatasetLoader`
2. Implement the `_load_examples()` method
3. Ensure examples use standard field names: `"question"`, `"answer"`, `"id"`
4. Add your loader to the `create_dataset_loader()` function
5. Test with both `run_script.py` and `validate_script.py`

## 📜 License

MIT License - see LICENSE file for details.

Commit message:

add benchmark results in readme

README.md, after:

# TextEvolve

![TextEvolve Overview](images/textevolve_diagram.png)

An advanced AI system that uses LLM-driven reasoning and memory to iteratively improve its approach to solving problems from datasets. The system is task-agnostic, meaning no prompting or instruction is needed for a new dataset - just provide "question" and "answer" fields. The system employs dynamic exploration/exploitation strategies and adapts its approach (creating new functions, writing code that generates and executes new code, writing prompts, etc.) based on performance feedback.

⚠️ EXPERIMENTAL ⚠️ The system also includes a meta-self-modifying loop (system_improver.py), using higher order instructions to edit the system (this respository).

## 📄 Paper & Demo

**📖 Read the Paper:** [TextEvolve: LLM-Driven Iterative Problem Solving](https://drive.google.com/file/d/11ZOOjVJeDfmoP1-sabi8lVWO9UEifZlP/view?usp=sharing)

**🎥 Watch the Demo:** [YouTube](https://youtu.be/QS-Mzb7P_9w)

**📁 Examples in Action:** 

[System-generated script for MATH dataset](examples/MATH_script.py)

[Memory / experiment log for HotpotQA](examples/HOTPOTQA_learnings.txt)


🚧 **Repository Status: Under Construction** 🚧

**Current State:**
- ✅ TextEvolve is stable and runs successfully
- 🔄 Codebase is actively being refactored and cleaned up
- 📝 Documentation and examples are being written
- 🏗️ Repository structure may change frequently

Please expect ongoing changes to code organization, APIs, and documentation as we work toward a more polished release.

**Preliminary Results:**
Here's some preliminary benchmark data from the paper comparing standard I/O with Gemini 2.0 Flash vs. the best performing TextEvolve program run with Gemini 2.0 Flash. (NB: Run over 100 randomly sampled examples from the test set - more extensive benchmarking is underway). TextEvolve boosts performance by automating manual experimenting over workflows, prompts, and code.

Program search is typically completed in around **20-30 minutes** over **~100 data examples** for **$.05-$.10** in Gemini credits.

![](images/results.png)

---

 

## 🚀 Quick Start

⚠️ TextEvolve has the ability to write and execute code - please run the system in a safe or sandboxed environment ⚠️

1. **Set your Gemini API key:**
   ```bash
   export GEMINI_API_KEY=your_api_key_here
   ```

2. **Run the system:**
   ```bash
   # Basic usage with 5 iterations
   python run_script.py --dataset your_dataset.jsonl --loader jsonl --iterations 5

   # Example with MATH benchmark
   python run_script.py --dataset hendrycks_math/math_test.jsonl --loader math --iterations 5
   ```

You can run more iterations if you're unsatisfied with the result. This will pick up right where the system left off. After the system runs you'll see a final report:
![](images/system_output.png)

4. **Validate results:**
   ```bash
   # Test the best script on examples 100-199
   python validate_script.py --script scripts/script_iteration_4.py --dataset hendrycks_math/math_test.jsonl --loader math --start 100 --end 199
   ```

5. **Reset system:**
   ```bash
   # Wipe memory and start the system from scratch
   python reset_system.py
   ```

## 📊 Supported Dataset Formats

The system supports multiple dataset formats through modular loaders:

### Built-in Loaders

| Loader | Dataset Type | Example Usage |
|--------|--------------|---------------|
| `arc` | ARC (Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus) | `--loader arc` |
| `jsonl` | JSONL files (one JSON per line) | `--loader jsonl` |
| `json` | JSON files with configurable fields | `--loader json` |
| `simpleqa` | SimpleQA dataset | `--loader simpleqa` |
| `math` | MATH dataset | `--loader math` |
| `natural_plan` | Natural Plan dataset | `--loader natural_plan` |
| `gpqa` | GPQA dataset | `--gpqa` |
| `hotpotqa` | HotpotQA dataset | `--gpqa` |
| `custom` | Your own custom format | `--loader custom` |

### Usage Examples

```bash
# ARC dataset (directory of JSON files)
python run_script.py --dataset ARC_2024_Training/ --loader arc --iterations 10

# JSONL dataset (like MATH benchmark)
python run_script.py --dataset math_test.jsonl --loader math --iterations 5

# Custom JSON with specific fields
python run_script.py --dataset custom.json --loader json --input-field question --output-field answer --iterations 5

# JSONL with custom fields (like DROP dataset)
python run_script.py --dataset drop_dataset.jsonl --loader jsonl --input-field question --output-field answers_spans --iterations 5

# Disable shuffling for consistent ordering
python run_script.py --dataset dataset.jsonl --loader jsonl --no-shuffle --iterations 5
```

## 🔧 Command Line Options

### run_script.py

| Option | Description | Default |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `--iterations` | Number of iterations to run | 5 |
| `--dataset` | Path to dataset file/directory | required |
| `--loader` | Type of dataset loader | required |
| `--input-field` | Input field name (JSON/JSONL) | "input" |
| `--output-field` | Output field name (JSON/JSONL) | "output" |
| `--passage-field` | Passage field (JSONL) | "passage" |
| `--no-shuffle` | Disable dataset shuffling | False |
| `--seed` | Random seed | 42 |

### validate_script.py

| Option | Description | Default |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `--script` | Path to script to validate | required |
| `--dataset` | Path to dataset | required |
| `--loader` | Dataset loader type | required |
| `--start` | Start index for validation | 0 |
| `--end` | End index for validation | 99 |
| `--detailed` | Show detailed results | False |

## 🏗️ Creating Custom Dataset Loaders

### Method 1: Simple Custom Loader

For basic custom formats, extend the `DatasetLoader` class:

```python
from dataset_loader import DatasetLoader
import json

class MyDatasetLoader(DatasetLoader):
    def _load_examples(self):
        """Load examples from your custom format"""
        with open(self.dataset_path, 'r') as f:
            data = json.load(f)

        for key, example in data.items():
            # Convert to standard format
            self.examples.append({
                "id": key,
                "question": example["my_input_field"],  # Standard field: "question"
                "answer": example["my_output_field"],   # Standard field: "answer"
                "meta": {
                    "source": "my_dataset",
                    "original_data": example
                }
            })

        print(f"Loaded {len(self.examples)} examples from custom dataset")

# Register and use your loader
from dataset_loader import create_dataset_loader

def create_my_loader(**kwargs):
    return MyDatasetLoader(**kwargs)

# Add to the create_dataset_loader function or use directly
loader = MyDatasetLoader(dataset_path="my_data.json", shuffle=True)
```

### Method 2: Using the Custom Loader Framework

For more complex formats, use the built-in custom loader:

```python
from dataset_loader import create_dataset_loader

def load_my_examples(dataset_path):
    """Load examples from your dataset"""
    # Your custom loading logic
    with open(dataset_path, 'r') as f:
        raw_data = f.read()

    # Process and return list of examples
    examples = []
    # ... your processing logic ...
    return examples

def get_my_input(example):
    """Extract input from example"""
    return example["my_question_field"]

def get_my_output(example):
    """Extract output from example"""
    return example["my_answer_field"]

# Create the custom loader
loader = create_dataset_loader(
    "custom",
    dataset_path="my_dataset.xyz",
    load_examples_fn=load_my_examples,
    get_input_fn=get_my_input,
    get_output_fn=get_my_output,
    shuffle=True
)

# Use with agent system
from agent_system import AgentSystem
agent = AgentSystem(dataset_loader=loader)
```

## 📈 How It Works

### 1. Adaptive Strategy

The system uses three main strategies:
- **Explore** (60% initially): Try completely new approaches
- **Exploit** (20% initially): Combine successful techniques  
- **Refine** (20% initially): Make targeted improvements to the best script

The balance between these strategies adapts based on performance.

### 2. Progressive Testing

- Starts with small batches (3-5 examples)
- For promising scripts (>60% accuracy), runs progressive testing (backtesting) on a set of previously seen examples
- Adjusts batch size based on performance, balancing throughput with acquiring accurate measurement of itertation performance

### 3. LLM-Driven Improvements

- Uses LLM reasoning for strategy decisions, error analysis, and script generation
- Employs and creates novel advanced agentic patterns like ReAct, chain-of-thought, and verification loops
- Automatically repairs and debugs generated scripts

### 4. Example Workflow

```
Iteration 0: Baseline script (simple LLM call) → 45% accuracy
Iteration 1: Explore new approach → 62% accuracy → Progressive testing → 58% overall
Iteration 2: Exploit successful techniques → 71% accuracy → Progressive testing → 65% overall  
Iteration 3: Refine best approach → 73% accuracy → Progressive testing → 68% overall
...
```


## Quick Setup

### 1. Install uv (if not already installed)

**macOS/Linux:**
```bash
curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh
```

### 2. Clone and Setup Project

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone <www.github.com/nickcdryan/madas>

# Install dependencies (creates virtual environment automatically)
uv sync

# Set up your Gemini API key
export GEMINI_API_KEY=your_api_key_here
```

### 3. Verify Installation

```bash
# Run the verification script
uv run python verify_setup.py

# Quick test run (optional)
uv run python run_script.py --dataset hendrycks_math/math_test.jsonl --loader math --iterations 1
```

## 📁 Output Structure

The system creates several directories:

```
├── archive/                 # Iteration data and summaries
│   ├── iteration_0.json    # Detailed data for each iteration
│   ├── iteration_1.json
│   └── summaries.json      # Performance summaries
├── scripts/                # Generated scripts
│   ├── script_iteration_0.py
│   ├── script_iteration_1.py
│   └── ...
├── learnings.txt           # Accumulated insights and patterns
└── README.md
```

## 🎯 Performance Tracking

The system tracks multiple metrics:

- **Batch Accuracy**: Performance on current test batch
- **Progressive Accuracy**: Performance on small set of previously seen examples  
- **Combined Accuracy**: Weighted average across all tested examples
- **Capability Assessment**: Strengths, weaknesses, and improvement areas

Example output:
```
Iteration  Strategy     Batch Acc.   Prog. Acc.      Combined    Batch Size  Prog. Size
8          exploit      75.00%       68.33% (60)     69.23%      4           60
```

## EXPERIMENTAL: Meta Self-Improvement

system_improver.py has access to review and edit the core functionality of the repository. Specifically, system_improver.py 
1) reviews the program
2) reviews iteration history and performance
3) reviews past changes made by system_improver.py in /diffs
4) proposes and integrates changes to the system, e.g. adding utility function, rewriting meta-agent prompts, etc.
5) creates system backups in /backup (eventually auto-rollback will be integrated if the new changes are system-breaking)

This system does not reliably work yet, please stay tuned.


## 🛠️ Advanced Usage

### Programmatic Usage

```python
from dataset_loader import create_dataset_loader
from agent_system import AgentSystem

# Create dataset loader
loader = create_dataset_loader(
    "jsonl",
    dataset_path="your_dataset.jsonl",
    shuffle=True,
    random_seed=42
)

# Initialize agent system
agent = AgentSystem(dataset_loader=loader)

# Run iterations
for i in range(10):
    result = agent.run_iteration()
    print(f"Iteration {i}: {result.get('performance', {}).get('accuracy', 0):.2f} accuracy")

# Get best script info
best_script = agent.get_best_script_info()
print(f"Best script: {best_script.get('path')} with {best_script.get('combined_accuracy', 0):.2f} accuracy")
```

### Custom Field Mapping

For datasets with non-standard field names:

```bash
# JSON dataset with custom fields
python run_script.py --dataset custom.json --loader json --input-field "problem_statement" --output-field "solution"

# JSONL dataset with passage and question
python run_script.py --dataset reading_comprehension.jsonl --loader jsonl --input-field "question" --passage-field "context" --output-field "answer"
```

## 🤝 Contributing

To add support for a new dataset format:

1. Create a new loader class inheriting from `DatasetLoader`
2. Implement the `_load_examples()` method
3. Ensure examples use standard field names: `"question"`, `"answer"`, `"id"`
4. Add your loader to the `create_dataset_loader()` function
5. Test with both `run_script.py` and `validate_script.py`

## 📜 License

MIT License - see LICENSE file for details.
